DO NOT MERGE: Review PR for ProjectService and Pytest plugin (#672)
canonical/craft-application: docs/reference/services/project.rst

.. py:currentmodule:: craft_application.services.project

``ProjectService``
==================

The ``ProjectService`` is a service for handling access to the project.

Project loading
---------------

The project service is responsible for loading, validating and rendering the project

> file to a :py:class:`~craft_application.models.Project` model. While the service can
> render a project as though it is running on any architecture and building for
> any platform or architecture, the most common use case is to render the project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
file to a :py:class:`~craft_application.models.Project` model. The service can
render a project as though it is running on any architecture and building for
any platform or architecture. However, the most common use case is to render the project
```
Same idea as @medubelko's suggestion

as though running on the current architecture, for the targeted platform.
Here, the steps taken are as follows:

.. How do I make this numbered?
.. contents::
    :class: this-will-duplicate-information-and-it-is-still-useful-here
    :local:

Configure the ProjectService
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first step is for the ``Application`` to configure the project service. This means
several things:

1. Set the project directory location. This is done by passing a directory on
   instantiation.
2. Set any ``platform`` and ``build_for`` hints. This is done using the ``configure``
   method.

Find the project file
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once a project directory is declared,
:py:meth:`ProjectService.resolve_project_file_path` can be used to find the path to the
actual project file. By default, this is simply ``<app name>.yaml`` in the project
directory. However, applications may override this if they need to search for the
project file at other locations.

Parse the project file YAML
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the project file is found, it is parsed as a `YAML`_ file. The file has additional
requirements beyond being a valid YAML document:

> 1. A file may only contain a single document.
> 2. The top level of this document must be a map whose keys are strings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It must only contain a single document.
2. Its top level must be a map whose keys are strings.
```
Saying "it may only contain a single document" sounds to me like it is expressing a possibility rather than a requirement.

Validate grammar
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At this step, any user-added grammar is validated using
:external+craft-grammar:doc:`Craft Grammar <index>`. No grammar is applied yet.

Perform application-specific transforms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At this step, any application-specific transformations of the document are applied

> using the :py:meth:`ProjectService._app_preprocess_project` method. By default,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by the :py:meth:`ProjectService._app_preprocess_project` method. By default,
```

nothing happens here.

> The project dict at this state is available using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this state, the project dict is made available by the
```
Feel free to disregard if this is not correct from a technical standpoint.

:py:meth:`ProjectService._preprocess` protected method. ``_preprocess`` calls
``_app_preprocess_project`` as the last step of processing before returning the
pre-processed project dict.

Expand environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Next, :external+craft-parts:func:`craft_parts.expand_environment` is called to replace
global parts variables with their expected values.

Process parts grammar
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> At this point, grammar is processed for each part defined. This includes parts added

Reviewer: SUPER NITPICK WARNING
```suggestion
At this point, grammar is processed for each defined part. This includes parts added
```
Feel free to ignore. Maybe this is just me, but when I read "each part defined", my brain immediately asks "defined where?". For whatever reason, I don't get this when I flip it around.
